# Research Statement


## Earthquake Data Analysis
Vishal Kamalakrishnan, Deyan Jani, Param Patel 

University of Virginia

Professor Geoffrey Fox

Independent Study Team

9/2023 – 12/2023

- - -

# Overall Objectives
Our research aims to facilitate better earthquake prediction by comparing the Epidemic Type Aftershock Sequence (ETAS) to see how it aligns with observed United States Geological Survey (USGS) records on earthquakes. We then focus on finding trends within USGS to better understand the nature of earthquakes and to serve as a baseline for future models

# ETAS vs USGS
## Introduction About ETAS
ETAS is a machine learning model that simulates earthquakes. It relies on commonly-used formulas to simulate the time, location, and magnitude of earthquakes.

## Objectives
This research aims to understand whether ETAS can accurately simulate the magnitudes and locations of earthquakes. By using data analysis to compare ETAS data with USGS records, we are able to determine the accuracy of this model and discover potential limitations. This understanding can be used to fine-tune future machine learning models, improving on areas where ETAS was successful and changing aspects where it failed. 

### Areas of interest:  
1. Does ETAS data align with USGS records?  
2. What are the energies generated by ETAS data, and is this consistent with USGS records?  
3. How frequently do high-magnitude earthquakes appear in ETAS simulations?  
4. Does ETAS accurately predict aftershocks for high-magnitude earthquakes?

### Data Collection:
We use the following earthquake-related data to compare ETAS and USGS data:  
- Coordinates  
- Magnitude  
- Date & Time
- Energy

# Trends Within USGS
## Introduction to the USGS Dataset
The United States Geological Survey (USGS) is a catalog on earthquakes. We filter the dataset based on magnitude > 3 and perform several other filters based on location.

### Data Collection:
We observe trends within the following about USGS data:
- Earthquakes Before/After large events  
- Time between large events  
- Earthquake Locations during large events

# References
John Rundle (and others) for developing the ETAS model
Geoffrey Fox for his energy conversion formula and guidance
Other references